Coal's Landscape Legacy
The major legacy of the coal pulled from under Newcastle is sadly the unprecedented 
amount of C02 in the atmosphere today. Indeed, because most mining happens below 
the surface and the product is burnt, the immediate physical legacy of the region's 
major industry is largely invisible. However, there are surprising sites throughout the city 
that suggest how coal mining shaped how we still experience Newcastle, if you know 
where to look.

[slide 1] Coxlodge Wagonway
The Coxlodge Wagonway
The urban area of Newcastle grew up around the mining industry in many ways. When 
the large pits were still open, the coal needed to be transported down to the River Tyne 
to be loaded onto ships and sold off to distant locals. Wagonways for hauling coal 
crisscrossed the region. In many places houses and other buildings were built around 
the wagonways ? in the same way that roads and railways define boundaries of urban 
landscapes today. Over the past few years, many of the remains of those wagonways 
have been transformed into public walkways and cycleways. 
They are widely used by different communities, but it is easy to overlook their history. 
What scant public information there is about the wagonways is easy to overlook, or has 
been damaged with time.
The Coxlodge Wagonway is the closest path to central Newcastle and cuts from the 
North end of the Jesmond dean all the way to the Coast Road. Though, as we will see 
later, it used to run much further, from Coxlodge to the River.

[slide 2] Jubilee Pit
One of the strange things about coal mining, in comparison to other major historic 
industries like large factories or ship-building, is the vast majority of the work done was 
underground and out-of-sight. Pit heads did require substantial buildings, as did 
processing of the coal, and there would have been infamous ?slag heaps? about. Still, 
the visible legacy of the mining industry was mostly erased.
Take, for example, the Jubilee Pit that was at the end of the Coxlodge wagonway. The 
area is now suburban houses with no trace of the former mine.

[slide 3] Heaton Mining Disaster
Coal mining was hard, brutal, and dangerous work for the men, boys, and horses in the 
mines. So it is not only  an accident of urban development that much of the legacy has 
been erased from the landscape, but also a way of actively forgetting who and what was 
sacrificed to create the wealth that we see on display in elegant buildings around the 
city. 
There are some small efforts to reinscribe the more complicated history into the 
landscape, such as the plaques put up by ?Heaton Beneath our Feet? in the Heaton 
Neighbourhood. But a plaque cannot capture what life was like down a mine shaft. 

